Add a small tutorial on deploying Quarkus app with Ansible (#32860)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/ansible.adoc

Reviewer: Thank you so much for this very interesting Ansible collection. I found some problems when testing that I comment next. If you need help or have any problem  with my comments ping me.

		-e app_name=getting-started \
		-e quarkus_app_repo_url='https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus-quickstarts.git' \
		-e quarkus_app_source_folder='getting-started' \
		-e quarkus_path_to_folder_to_deploy=/opt/quarkus_deploy
----

The four parameters provided to the playbook are pretty self-explaratory. The first one, `app_name`, is the name of the application, in our case, it's just `getting-started`. The second one, `quarkus_app_repo_url`, is the URL to the Git repository to checkout. The third one is optional, `quarkus_app_source_folder` speficifies, if needed, which subfolder from the repo the source code is located. Finally, the fourth one, simply indicates where to install the application on the target.

=== Inventory file

If you are not familiar with Ansible, please note that the inventory needs to be provided for the command above to run properly. This is a simple text file providing the information Ansible requires on the target system it manages. Please refer to the Ansible documentation for more information on https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/inventory_guide/intro_inventory.html[Ansible inventory].

[source,bash]
----
[all]

10.0.0.1
10.0.0.2
----

> 

Author: It works with gather_facts: false on a (registered) RHEL8, but you are right, it's probably better to switch to to true.

Fixed in this [commit](https://github.com/ansible-middleware/quarkus/commit/ab1a25ac30700e623f0d167de9696e2cf99548f8), I'll trigger a release soon, but you may need to modify this value manually next time you try.

Apr 13 12:48:19 bd71f39642c8 java[853]: --\___\_\____/_/ |_/_/|_/_/|_|\____/___/
Apr 13 12:48:19 bd71f39642c8 java[853]: 2023-04-13 12:48:19,284 INFO  [io.quarkus] (main) getting-started 1.0.0-SNAPSHOT on JVM (powered by Quarkus 2.16.6.Final) started in 0.607s. Listening on: http://0.0.0.0:8080
Apr 13 12:48:19 bd71f39642c8 java[853]: 2023-04-13 12:48:19,309 INFO  [io.quarkus] (main) Profile prod activated.
Apr 13 12:48:19 bd71f39642c8 java[853]: 2023-04-13 12:48:19,310 INFO  [io.quarkus] (main) Installed features: [cdi, resteasy-reactive, smallrye-context-propagation, vertx]
----

Manually, you can also test if the app is reachable:

[source,bash]
----
# curl -I http://localhost:8080/
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
accept-ranges: bytes
content-length: 3918
cache-control: public, immutable, max-age=86400
last-modified: Thu, 2 Mar 2023 11:03:18 GMT
date: Thu, 2 Mar 2023 11:03:18 GMT
----

We'll see how to automate those validation in the next and last part of this tutorial.

=== Writing a playbook

Of course, you’ll most likely need to build on this, so you may want to write up your own playbook, rather than just using the one provided by the collection. Below is an example of such playbook:

> [source,yml]

Reviewer: I had problems copying this section. The tab characters generated a malformed `yaml` file that ansible complained when parsing. Please check this.

On the other hand, I had to declare the collection at the beginning of the playbook when used for the first time because Ansible was unable to identify the dependency on the `quarkus` role.

```yaml
- name: "Build and deploy a Quarkus app using Ansible"
...
  collections:
    - middleware_automation.quarkus
...
```

https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/collections_guide/collections_using_playbooks.html#using-collections-in-playbooks

Author: Fixed (hopefully) in [commit 32860](https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/32860/commits)

----
- name: "Build and deploy a Quarkus app using Ansible"
  hosts: all

>   gather_facts: false

Reviewer: Had to put `gather_facts: true` for the package task to work.

  vars:
	quarkus_app_repo_url: 'https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus-quickstarts.git'
	app_name: getting-started
	quarkus_app_source_folder: getting-started
	quarkus_path_to_folder_to_deploy: /opt/quarkus_deploy

  pre_tasks:
	- name: "Build the Quarkus from {{ quarkus_app_repo_url }}."
  	ansible.builtin.include_role:
    	name: quarkus
    	tasks_from: build.yml

  tasks:
	- name: "Deploy Quarkus app on target."
  	ansible.builtin.include_role:
    	name: quarkus
    	tasks_from: deploy.yml
----

To run this playbook, you use again the ansible-playbook command, but providing now the path to the playbook:

[source,bash]
----
$ ansible-playbook -i inventory playbook.yml
----

> 

Reviewer: I'm trying to test with a playbook based on the previous template, but the execution failing.

The error is the following:

```
TASK [middleware_automation.quarkus.quarkus : Ensure Quarkus system group exists on target system] ***********************************************************************************
fatal: [127.0.0.1]: FAILED! => {"changed": false, "msg": "groupadd: Permission denied.\ngroupadd: cannot lock /etc/group; try again later.\n", "name": "quarkus_app"}
```

My playbook is this:

```
- name: "Build and deploy a Quarkus app using Ansible"
  hosts: all
  gather_facts: true
  collections:
    - middleware_automation.quarkus
  vars:
    quarkus_app_repo_url: https://github.redhat/quarkusio/quarkus-quickstarts.git
    app_name: getting-started
    quarkus_app_source_folder: getting-started
    quarkus_path_to_folder_to_deploy: /tmp/quarkus_deploy

  pre_tasks:
  - name: "Build the Quarkus from {{ quarkus_app_repo_url }}."
    ansible.builtin.include_role:
      name: quarkus
      tasks_from: build.yml

  tasks:
  - name: "Deploy Quarkus app on target."
    ansible.builtin.include_role:
      name: quarkus
      tasks_from: deploy.yml
```

I think the problem is at collection level and might be that the group creation is missing a `become: true`. - https://github.com/ansible-middleware/quarkus/blob/main/roles/quarkus/tasks/deploy.yml#L19

The same might happen with the `Ensure Quarkus user exists on target system.` task.

Author: Nice catch! Thanks! I sadly tested running Ansible as root, so I did not spot this issue.

Fixed in this [commit](https://github.com/ansible-middleware/quarkus/commit/8a7fee5b2a94bf63a3e60ab5c42ad4ef9a15b9f3)

== Prerequisites

:prerequisites-time: 10 minutes
:prerequisites-no-maven:
:prerequisites-no-cli:
include::{includes}/prerequisites.adoc[]

You'll need to https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/installation_guide/intro_installation.html[install Ansible] on your workstation. Once this is done, you can install this extension for Ansible dedicated to Quarkus with the following command:

[source,bash]
----
$ ansible-galaxy collection install middleware_automation.quarkus
----

=== Inventory file

If you are not familiar with Ansible, please note that the inventory needs to be provided for the command above to run properly. This is a simple text file providing the information Ansible requires on the target system it manages. Please refer to the Ansible documentation for more information on https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/inventory_guide/intro_inventory.html[Ansible inventory].

[source,bash]
----
[all]

10.0.0.1
10.0.0.2
----

> To follow tutorial, you may want to use only one machine (localhost) and skip the ssh authentification setup. This can be easily achieved by using the following inventory file:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To follow the tutorial, you may want to use only one machine (localhost) and skip the ssh authentication setup. This can be easily achieved by using the following inventory file:
```

[source,bash]
----
[all]
localhost ansible_connection=local
----

=== Root access on target system

> A few tasks performed by the Ansible collection for Quarkus will requires administrative privileges on the target (create group and user account, install packages). If Ansible does run as root, you'll need to add the following options to the `ansible-playbook` commmand line:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A few tasks performed by the Ansible collection for Quarkus will require administrative privileges on the target (create a group and user account, install packages). If Ansible does run as root, you'll need to add the following options to the `ansible-playbook` command line:
```

[source,bash]
----
$ ansible-playbook -i inventory  --ask-become-pass  ...
----

== Tutorial

With the Ansible collection installed on the controller, you can already directly use a playbook provided with it to build and deploy your Quarkus application:

[source,bash]
----
ansible-playbook -i inventory \
  middleware_automation.quarkus.playbook \
  -e app_name=getting-started \
  -e quarkus_app_repo_url='https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus-quickstarts.git' \
  -e quarkus_app_source_folder='getting-started' \
  -e quarkus_path_to_folder_to_deploy=/opt/quarkus_deploy
----

> The four parameters provided to the playbook are pretty self-explaratory. The first one, `app_name`, is the name of the application, in our case, it's just `getting-started`. The second one, `quarkus_app_repo_url`, is the URL to the Git repository to checkout. The third one is optional, `quarkus_app_source_folder` speficifies, if needed, which subfolder from the repo the source code is located. Finally, the fourth one, simply indicates where to install the application on the target.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The four parameters provided to the playbook are pretty self-explanatory. The first one, `app_name`, is the name of the application, in our case, it's just `getting-started`. The second one, `quarkus_app_repo_url`, is the URL to the Git repository to checkout. The third one is optional, `quarkus_app_source_folder` specifies, if needed, which subfolder from the repo the source code is located. Finally, the fourth one indicates where to install the application on the target.
```

date: Thu, 2 Mar 2023 11:03:18 GMT
----

We'll see how to automate those validation in the next and last part of this tutorial.

=== Writing a playbook

Of course, you’ll most likely need to build on this, so you may want to write up your own playbook, rather than just using the one provided by the collection. Below is an example of such playbook:

[source,yml]
----
- name: "Build and deploy a Quarkus app using Ansible"
  hosts: all
  gather_facts: true
  vars:
    quarkus_app_repo_url: 'https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus-quickstarts.git'
    app_name: getting-started
    quarkus_app_source_folder: getting-started
    quarkus_path_to_folder_to_deploy: /opt/quarkus_deploy

  pre_tasks:
    - name: "Build the Quarkus from {{ quarkus_app_repo_url }}."
      ansible.builtin.include_role:
        name: quarkus
        tasks_from: build.yml
  tasks:
    - name: "Deploy Quarkus app on target."
      ansible.builtin.include_role:
        name: quarkus
        tasks_from: deploy.yml
----

To run this playbook, you use again the ansible-playbook command, but providing now the path to the playbook:

[source,bash]
----
$ ansible-playbook -i inventory playbook.yml
----

> You also can automate the validation part we mentioned in the previous section. You can use the https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/collections/ansible/builtin/assert_module.html[ansible.builtin.assert] module and populate the https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/collections/ansible/builtin/service_facts_module.html#examples[service facts] to ensure the systemd service of the Quarkus app is running, along with https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/collections/ansible/builtin/uri_module.html[ansible.builtin.uri] to check that the Quarkus bapp is accessible.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You also can automate the validation part we mentioned in the previous section. You can use the https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/collections/ansible/builtin/assert_module.html[ansible.builtin.assert] module and populate the https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/collections/ansible/builtin/service_facts_module.html#examples[service facts] to ensure the systemd service of the Quarkus app is running, along with https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/collections/ansible/builtin/uri_module.html[ansible.builtin.uri] to check that the Quarkus app is accessible.
```
